Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome USB technology manager,
Craig Keithley.
Good afternoon everybody,
thank you for coming.
Now is a very important time for us.
Obviously we're emphasizing Mac OS X,
and as part of that we'll
be talking about some of the
Mac OS X features for USB.
I'm also going to do an overview
of Mac OS 9 to give you an
insight into what automatic,
what standard USB drivers
we have built into the OS,
and to give you an overview of
what that architecture looks like.
That's mostly meant as a refresher
because we are moving to 10.
The other thing too that I decided
Monday night as we committed to making
the announcement about Aladdin Installer
Maker supporting USB Software Locator
is I cut out my five slides that I've
been presenting for the last couple of
years about what's inside a USB device.
I figure by now you already know that.
What you want to know is how to
make USB Software Locator work.
So we'll have some presentation on that.
And at the end we will go into doing
driver development on Mac OS X.
There is some difference in
USB under 9 and USB under 10.
The APIs are slightly different,
the structure is slightly different,
but I think you'll see that it's a
vast improvement over what we've had
in driver architectures in the past.
10 with I/O Kit is a great leap forward.
I'll also talk to you about our
recommendations that we make to
developers when they come in and
they ask us how should we create
USB devices for the Macintosh.
And those recommendations, by and large,
apply to both Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
So let me talk about what
we've done in Mac OS 9.
I'll go over what's new,
I'll talk about the standard drivers,
and I'll give you an
overview of the architecture.
So what's new in 904?
Well, not a lot.
I mean,
we've been fine tuning performance.
We've been addressing some issues.
The notable improvements,
new features in Mac OS 904
and with the just released
two day ago multimedia update,
our good USB audio input works very well.
And we also are pleased to
announce that we built into
Mac OS 9 USB controlled UPSs.
So all those that you've
seen in the press releases
about having USB interfaces,
not only do we have a USB driver,
we also have added functionality
into our power manager to
support UPSs automatically.
It looks like a battery device.
And it's very cool and
it's a great addition.
So what's the specifics
about the audio driver?
Well, if you haven't been
working with USB audio,
I can tell you quite simply,
it supports multiple frequencies,
multiple sampling.
We use PCM format,
which is a particular way of
representing the data in the data stream.
We support both stereo output,
stereo input, and monophonic input.
We don't today support monophonic output.
We don't support vendor unique
implementations for USB audio devices.
If you're going to do a USB audio device,
follow the USB specification.
And you'll hear me say that
a couple of times today.
That's our number one recommendation.
If you're going to do a
USB device and you want it to
be supported by Apple's drivers,
please, absolutely,
follow the USB spec for
that class of device.
That's the best way to get plug-and-play
functionality on the Macintosh.
With power supplies, the major change,
aside from a USB driver,
is a new power manager.
And this is in 904,
it's in the new world-based Macintoshes,
and it's Power Manager 2.0.
And Power Manager 2.0,
which is only on the iMac, iBook,
PowerMac, PowerBook families,
supports UPSs built in.
This will allow you to connect any
UPS that conforms to that spec.
Another one of those
great recommendations:
follow the USP class specifications
will automatically work.
We also exported an API.
This allows third parties
that want to do UPSs,
vendor specific control panels,
monitoring of specific features
that aren't supported by us,
changing the thresholds.
See, we have some specific thresholds.
When it hits 50% of battery capacity,
put up a warning dialogue.
When it reaches, I think,
10 or 20%, we do a graceful shutdown.
You may want to do a lot more than that,
and you can do that by using
these APIs that we've exported.
It'll make for really great products,
and there have been some product
announcements in recent days.
I saw a press release come out from
APC yesterday that announced that
they're supporting our new architecture
in Mac OS 904 and using this new
USB standard to control their UPS.
And they added extra software,
and they used our API to
add extra functionality.
By the way,
the USB UPS stuff is part of the USB DDK.
So you can go take a look at that
and you can see how to expand upon
the basic features that we have.
So what's in Mac OS 9?
Well, HID devices, keyboards, mice,
gaming, UPSs.
Amazingly enough,
UPSs are actually a HID device.
Mass storage, except for CD and tape,
we support a wide range of USB mass
storage devices automatically.
You follow USB spec, you plug it in,
our driver loads and
recognizes it and supports it.
We support V.90, V.25 ter,
roughly Haze compatible modems,
built in support in Mac OS.
You can just build your modem,
comply with the spec, plug it in,
and it works.
Audio, as I've already mentioned,
we have audio input and output.
We both support stereo
and monophonic devices.
And printing, we've had for a long while,
and this has actually turned
out to be pretty powerful,
both for people who are printing
to PostScript printers and who just
use our low-level printer driver
with their own chooser extension
to talk directly to the printer.
We supply that.
You don't need to write a low-level
driver if your device complies with the
USB class specification for printing.
So we've added,
with the desktop printing utility,
the ability to print directly to
USB-connected PostScript printers.
Very nice feature.
And people who are doing non-PostScript
printers can still use our class
driver to talk to the printer.
So they just need to
write a chooser extension.
So what's in a class specification?
I talk about that a lot,
and I really need to go into it in
some detail to continue to encourage
people to follow those specifications.
For one thing,
it details how the device behaves.
You don't need to reinvent the wheel.
Please don't.
We use those specifications,
and quite often the discussions that
take place between Apple engineering and
developer technical support and myself
usually end up down to the realm of where
are we not following the specification?
What can we do different?
And that applies to both
Apple and the developer.
We appreciate feedback.
When we hear that developers
are having difficulty,
they think the device meets the spec,
we really value the dialogue that we have
with the developers to ensure that we
give the best possible support we can.
These specifications can
be found at www.usb.org.
I'll talk later about our
recommendations in detail,
but for right now,
if you want to know what's in a spec,
go to www.usb.org.
So let me talk about the
architecture now in Mac OS 9.
If you haven't heard this before,
I apologize because I'm
going to go quickly,
because we have other
things we want to show you.
The three or four major
components are the USB manager,
there's a USB expert,
a USB services library,
and the USB interface module.
Now I think I've got a graphic.
Yes, I do.
At the very bottom of this
whole architecture is actually
the USB host controller.
Above that is the USB interface module,
or a WIM.
The WIM actually does the translation
from the basic USB commands,
APIs, to the hardware.
So that's our hardware abstraction
layer at that lowest level.
Above that is the USB services library,
the USB manager, and the USB expert.
And they all play different roles.
The USB services library takes calls
from your drivers and translates them
down into the USB interface module.
So doing bulk reads, bulk writes,
interrupt reads, interrupt writes,
and so forth, take place through the
USB services library.
The USB expert and manager are
closely related in that they deal
with allowing outside applications
to request information about
what devices are connected,
receive notification about
what devices have been removed,
locate devices and match drivers
to devices when they're connected.
All that layer is not necessarily
available to all clients.
We couldn't prevent you,
but we really-- drivers should
talk to the USB services library,
applications, shims,
control panels should talk to the
expert and the manager as appropriate.
Above that,
you can have either a USB shim,
which is a special type of code fragment,
it's a specific type
of a library actually,
that gets loaded before the init
parade and allows you to set things
up if you later on in your init
parade need things to happen for you.
We'll give you a good example of that.
[Transcript missing]
We also allow for people
who have registered,
either in a shim or unit table driver,
to be notified when a
device is connected.
That's also the responsibility
of the USB manager and expert.
They cooperate in terms
of locating drivers,
installing the drivers,
and notifying people above them
that there has been something
connected or disconnected.
When you're writing a USB device driver,
The things that you need to do,
pretty much always,
are select the configuration of
the device if you need something
different than the first configuration.
Find the interface you care about,
if it's a vendor specific driver.
Find the pipes or endpoints
within that device.
And then accessing those pipes.
That's the responsibility of the driver.
We actually think of USB device
drivers predominantly as being...
Just data transport layers.
So you create this driver that then will
push or pull data up to a higher level,
the shim or the unit table driver.
When
A device is connected,
and this is one of the little
magical parts of how USB works.
The part that actually detects it,
the hardware portion
that actually detects it,
is in the hub.
The hub itself is electrically
monitoring what devices are connected,
or at least that a device is
connected is a better way to put it.
And our hub driver will
receive notification that a
new device has been attached.
And when it does,
it goes out to that device,
it enumerates the device,
it examines the device,
and reports what kind of
device it is up to the manager.
When the manager, sorry,
the expert detects this,
it will then go off and locate an
appropriate driver and send notification.
As that's happening, the device itself,
the driver itself,
is actually called through its
validate hardware routine to verify
that this actually is a good device.
It then calls the initialization routine
and the driver starts functioning.
As soon as the device
driver is initialized,
that's when we send notification
to people who have requested it.
I described previously that
the driver is a driver.
That driver matching depends upon
looking in the driver itself.
Now, in Mac OS 9,
we have a driver description structure.
In Mac OS X, we have an XML bundle.
In many ways, functionally,
they perform the same duties.
That is, they describe what's
in the device driver,
which devices it supports, vendor name,
sorry, vendor ID, product ID,
In 9,
the expert uses that data to determine
whether the driver is vendor specific
or if it's generic or standard classes.
Now so far, Apple's been the only people
providing standard device
drivers and we like it that way.
We'd prefer that if
you're writing drivers,
please only write
vendor specific drivers.
And they take precedence over
Apple's standard drivers.
So if you have a device
that's a standard class,
but you really want to add your own
special features or functionality,
you can do that.
It will take priority over
Apple's standard drivers.
So what's inside of a USB driver?
Well, the driver description structure
obviously with all the information,
product ID, vendor ID, class, subclass,
etc.
A driver dispatch table which has
entry points in for validate hardware,
device initialization,
interface initialization,
a notification routine where we can
send you power management messages,
etc.
and a finalize routine.
And it's very straightforward to
take a USB driver and add these
functions in and get them to work
just by those five basic entry points.
One change that we did
make back in Mac OS,
I think I'll say 8.6,
was that we created with
USB 1.2 the ability for you,
the developer, to put multiple drivers
into a single file.
And we parsed through that file
looking at all of the drivers
and finding the best match.
So no longer, starting with 8.6 anyway,
do you need to have
multiple driver files.
And we would prefer you use 8.6,
use this feature in 1.2,
that's a better way of saying it,
use the feature in 1.2 to
contain multiple drivers.
Don't put multiple driver files
in the extensions folder anymore.
And what we've been telling to people
in general is we really want you to...
Focus on 8.6.
If somebody has 8.5 or 8.5.1,
it's a free upgrade to 8.6.
You can just go to the Apple website
and tell your customers,
that's where your
customers can download it.
That's what we want people to do,
is to have them upgrade if
they're at 8.5 or 8.5.1 to 8.6,
to at least get to USB 1.2.
Inside of the driver
description structure,
there's a number of important tags.
And as I said,
this matches the XML bundle description
in that it has a vendor and product ID.
It has a class, subclass,
and protocol for the device.
and protocol for the interface.
You can match either as an
interface driver or you can
match as a device driver.
And we have some driver loading options.
These driver loading options
allow you to tag that this driver
should only be loaded for a,
as a vendor-specific driver.
It shouldn't be loaded as
a standard class driver.
We ask that you set
that bit appropriately.
And if, whether or not it should
load as an interface driver.
And there's a tag in there also
that says must match protocol.
So we provide some pretty powerful
means for you to clearly define which
device your driver should load for.
So how do you get started with Mac OS 9?
Well, go get our USB DDK from the
Apple developer website,
developer.apple.com.
It's got an entry point
in there for hardware.
You follow that to USB and we
have a nice Getting Started page
for writing USB drivers.
There's also a USB mailing list,
which is on that website,
that you can join in.
And that is a nice collaborative
environment where a lot of developers
share experiences and discuss solutions.
And both myself and the USB engineering
team watch that very closely to see
if there's things we should jump
in with and help with where we can.
And of course,
we want you to go to the USB website,
www.usb.org,
and get those specifications.
I've listed the websites here.
I'll stay on this slide for a few
moments if you want to copy it down.
So the exact web address
for USB developers is
developer.apple.com/hardware/usb/devinfo.
htm.
We want you to join the mailing list.
We have a link there to a page
where you can find information
on joining the mailing list.
And our DDK is also available.
Our DDK we've been very
aggressively releasing,
and I believe we will do our best
to continue in the same way we've
been doing for the last two years.
We get that DDK out in
beta form early for you.
So you can test your devices with it.
The other corollary to that
is that as ADC members,
we really want you to go to the
ADC seed site and get the other
updates that are available for the OS.
Whether they be multimedia
update if it's released,
software updates for the OS, etc.
Please watch very closely USB DDK and
watch very closely the Mac OS updates
as they come on the ADC seed site.
One of the reasons why that's
very important to us is we hate,
with a passion, hearing after we've gone
GM with an OS update,
that there's all kinds of new problems
that have been revealed with that update.
We want you to report those problems
to us far in advance of us going GM.
That's the only opportunity
we have to fix them.
So please get the DEK,
please go to the ADC seed
site and get the OS updates.
So that concludes my
initial presentation,
and I want to invite Rich Kubuda up here.
One of the things, like I said,
we pulled the inside USB hardware
section to talk to you about
the USB Software Locator.
You might have seen the
announcements earlier this week.
We have intentionally worked very
hard to be proactive and listen to
your feedback on USB Software Locator.
We did research,
and we found that the reason
people weren't adopting
USB Software Locator was because only
the Apple installer was supported.
We took that feedback, we ran with it,
and I'm pleased to announce that
we will be giving out at the end
of this session today beta CDs,
beta copies of the Aladdin Installer
Maker for free for USB Software Locator.
This is a special deal, in fact.
It's a free, for USB devices only.
It's a one-year license
to Installer Maker.
The CD itself is the coupon.
So if you get a free CD,
hold onto that CD.
If you lose that CD, that's your coupon.
You've got to have that
to get the free update.
So with that, Rich,
do you want to come over and do your
presentation on the -- thank you.
Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
So what do we do to get started?
The first thing I'll
tell you about this is,
this is probably where you
will spend most of your time,
because if any of you
have used Installer Maker,
it's a very simple application to run.
So first of all, I would recommend that
you get the USB Tech Note,
the software locator Tech Note.
It is available as part of the USB DDK.
It's been there since the 1.3.5 release,
it's there in the 1.4.1 release,
and it will give you the important
information about the process
by which you register a package.
The web address is located there,
but if you already have the DDK,
you will have that
Tech Note as part of the DDK.
You then need to get an Apple Connect ID,
and assuming that most of you have
already registered with the ADR,
or Apple Developer Relations program,
you have one.
So that should be very easy,
but if you don't,
there is a free online registration
process by which you can get an ID.
You do not have to become
paid members to get this.
We just need to be able to have a way
to track you entering into the database.
The next part is that we need
to have you registered with DTS.
You send a request to DTS asking
that you want to be registered
for a specific vendor ID.
Now at this time,
we do request that the representative
of the company for the specific vendor
ID be the one to register that access.
Next,
you create your Installer Maker document.
So you search "Running Installer Maker".
You first want to download the package.
You will be getting the package as
part of the CD at the end of this talk.
You also have the option of
downloading it from their site.
If you do have a shim as
part of your installation,
we want you to create a
very simple text file.
It is named "Installed.dat".
The purpose of that is that the code
resource will look for that document
and look for the name of the shim so
that we know what file to activate.
So that we know what file to activate.
You add an installer script
which is part of this package.
And then you put everything in a folder.
And with this copy,
you would create a disk copy image.
You would then use Installer
Maker to encode the image into bin,
Mac binary, or .hqx format.
And then finally place
it on an HTTP server.
Or you can also do it on an FTP server.
We strongly recommend that you
place it onto a web server.
Primarily because a lot of
people don't know how to use it.
A lot of users may be behind firewalls
and may not have their system set for
passive mode to access an FTP server.
The next interesting part is
using the USB editor web page.
At this point,
I will do a demo to show what the
USB editor web page looks like.
Primarily its purpose is to provide
information about the device
ID that you are going to support.
And then also to indicate where the
software package will be downloaded.
And you can also use it to create a file.
And you can also specify information
about what protocol it is,
what version of USB is required,
and other particular pieces of
information to provide back for
the system to check to see that the
current requirements are present.
So, the simple part of testing the update
is once you have done all this,
plug the device in.
Assuming you have system 904.
But I forgot one important step.
As part of the USB software
locator toolkit,
which we provide in the DDK,
we need you first to set the
software update so that it will
look at a production server.
We have designed our software
update process so that there
are two different servers.
There is a production server,
which everybody in the world will see.
And then we have a staging server that
is specially designed for test processes.
By default,
the software update process is designed
to look for the production server.
So that is all the users with 904.
But we want you to be able to test this
without having your users worry about it.
So, we have a software update process.
But we want you to be able to test this
without having your users worry about it.
So, there is an option,
but it is not provided with the
system to tell you a software
update to look at a staging server
and not at the production server.
So, with the software locator switch,
you can set this option.
You would then connect your device.
And if everything is set up,
you will get the two
dialogues I mentioned.
And then the download process will begin.
You will momentarily see
a disk copy image mounted.
And a second later,
it will indicate that the software
package has been downloaded.
And ideally, your software driver should
be active for your device.
Now for a quick demo,
could I have demo two active?
Thank you.
So the web page I mentioned
takes you to this,
and this is where you would
enter your account name.
So here we have Rich Kubota.
[Transcript missing]
I happen to have demonstrated
an Anchorchips site right now.
So I've gone in here.
I've already, if this is the first time
you would add a device,
I have already created a
device for a sample USB driver.
You mentioned the name of the
driver or the device you're going
to support in the name field.
You specify the class of the device.
Now, one thing I should mention,
when you registered,
you mentioned a product ID, a vendor ID,
so we've already associated this
vendor ID with the record here.
So now at this point,
you're here to define your product.
You specify the type of class.
There's a pop-up to display the various
types of classes that we support.
The subclass of the product,
and for vendor specific it would be 255.
The product ID field,
and this will be in decimal,
not in the hex which
USBProber would display.
And the protocol field and your version.
You would save this information.
And once you save this information,
you can now add a software.
You can now add a package for
that to support the device.
I've already created one here.
And here you specify where the
driver will be downloaded from,
what size it is.
But there's also an
important part of this entry,
and that is the field that
says move to production.
Once you have everything working,
you would set the pop-up to yes.
And it will then, next time that we're
scanning for the updates,
we will see that this is now set to yes.
And we will move the information
to the production server and
it will be live to your users.
Indicate the name of the
product in the file name field.
The size of the download.
And destination folder
where you want it to go.
In the current process,
it's going to go to a temporary
folder off the desktop and it will be
trashed the next time you reboot it.
The software is required
to use the device.
You want... You do not require
a restart after installation.
And then you can specify the language.
And then in this download URL,
you would enter the name,
what the address is to
access the software package.
There's the product name.
And then you can specify here that you
want to require USB 1.4.1 to be present.
This can be important because
by setting this field,
people with 9.0 systems will not
be able to have this download.
have this software package
offered as a possibility.
You specify the binhex file name,
and again this can be
a Mac binary file name,
and the version number of this download.
You would save this information.
I'm not going to save it here,
and return back.
And that's pretty much the
registration process right there.
At this time,
I'd like to recognize a fellow member
of the USB team in the Apple directory.
He's simply listed as a
senior software engineer,
but for all of us,
he is the architect for the Mac,
for USB on Mac OS X, Rhoaads Hollowell.
So Rich, I've got great news.
So MindVision has just come to
us and said that they will be
adding support for USB software
locator in a very short while.
So not only will the
Apple installer work,
Aladdin installer maker
and MindVision as well.
So I'm very pleased to congratulate
MindVision for their participation.
Thanks guys.
I'm here to talk about where
we are in Mac OS X with USB.
A lot of this is a review of
stuff that you've seen in the
I/O Kit presentation or in the Firewire
presentation because it's very,
very similar.
Within Mac OS X,
this is sort of an overview.
Drivers, USB drivers in Mac OS X will
be using I/O Kit and will
be generally written in C++,
at least the USB classes that we provide
in I/O Kit in Mac OS X are in C++.
I'm going to talk a little bit
about the difference between kernel
mode drivers and user mode drivers,
very similar to the FireWire drivers.
I'm going to talk a little
bit about how Mac OS X does
driver matching and loading.
about the benefits of having
blocking I/O in Mac OS X,
and a little bit about the
multi-threaded drivers.
Comparing Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
In Mac OS 9, the driver description is in
the code fragment of the driver,
whereas in Mac OS X, it's part of the
XML bundle for the driver.
Scheduling under Mac OS 9 is all done
asynchronously with callback routines.
In Mac OS X,
you're not required to use asynchronous
drivers because you can do blocking I/O.
Programming in Mac OS 9, we pretty much,
all of our interfaces are C interfaces.
In Mac OS X, we use embedded C++,
just like the rest of I/O Kit,
and it's object-oriented programming
with all the benefits therein.
The driver framework inside of
Mac OS 9 is specific to USB,
whereas in Mac OS X we get
all of I/O Kit to work with.
So for example,
whereas in Mac OS 9 the notification of
the addition or removal of USB devices
is handled by the USB manager,
in Mac OS X it's handled by I/O Kit.
In I/O Kit, I/O Kit provides us with many
services that were in Mac OS 9 were
provided by the USB system itself,
which frees up USB to be, well,
much simpler.
The XML bundle in the Mac OS X driver
contains the driver information necessary
for I/O Kit to match and load a driver.
And because we are written in C++,
it speeds the development time
by allowing us to load a driver.
So we can get the driver information
that we need to be able to load a driver.
So when you're developing
a USB driver in Mac OS X,
similar to FireWire drivers,
you want to ask yourself, first of all,
do I need to write a kernel mode
driver or a user mode driver?
Does my driver live in kernel space
where resources are expensive,
or in user space where
resources are relatively cheap?
And to answer this question,
you need to ask four basic questions,
very similar to FireWire.
Is your driver used by the kernel?
If so, it needs to be a kernel driver.
Is your driver used by very
many of the tasks in the system?
If so, it needs to be a kernel driver.
Does your driver require
access to primary interrupts?
If so, it should be a kernel driver.
And do you need tight
synchronization between various
tasks that your driver performs?
And if so, you need a kernel driver.
So some concrete examples of
drivers that would be kernel mode
drivers versus user mode drivers.
Keyboards and mice need to be
kernel drivers because they are
used by just about every task,
every user visible task in the system.
A mass storage driver would need to be
a kernel mode driver because the kernel
would use the mass storage for storage.
Whereas a scanner driver
would be a user mode driver,
or a printer driver would
be a user mode driver.
A CDR driver,
again we go back to the Firewire example,
the CD part of it where you're just
looking at a CD in the device would
tend to be a kernel mode driver,
whereas the part of the driver that
actually wrote to the CDR device
would be a user mode driver.
The USB stack inside of I/O Kit shares
in the rest of the I/O Kit stack in
that you can perform blocking I/O.
It's multi-threaded,
and so you can block from your driver,
can block without blocking
the rest of the USB system.
This simplifies driver designs
by not making a requirement
that you have all kinds of
callback routines in your driver,
but callback routines are
available if you need them.
Part of an I/O Kit driver,
and therefore a USB driver,
is an XML driver description.
This is a file that is originally
edited with text that contains
all the information that
otherwise appears in Mac OS 9.
It appears in the driver description
table and contains information
such as product and vendor IDs,
class, subclass, protocol of the device,
and gives the information necessary
for I/O Kit to match a driver
for a particular device or a
particular interface within a device.
The way driver loading works
in Mac OS X is the following:
There is a hub driver attached that
is driving every hub in the system,
including the root hubs.
And this hub driver can detect when
a device is attached to the USB bus
and it enumerates the device.
It tells the controller to create
an I/O USB device object for
that device and then it registers
that object with I/O Kit,
causing that I/O USB device object to
become what is called in I/O Kit a nub.
That nub is now looked,
we look through the system,
all of the XML files basically
that are in the system and
I/O Kit finds the appropriate
driver to load against that nub.
It loads it, attaches it to the nub,
initializes the driver,
updates the I/O registry so that this
nub now appears in the I/O registry
and then the driver starts running and
can load other objects as necessary.
So here's a picture of what
Mac OS kernel drivers would look like.
At the bottom level we have the
USB nub for the USB controller itself,
which is a PCI device.
We have the PCI driver for that kernel,
which we call Apple OHCI.
We have a couple of USB devices.
On top of those devices we have drivers,
and because they're kernel drivers,
they both,
they live below the kernel boundary.
And there are other operating system
objects that might be attached to
those drivers to provide service
across the kernel boundary up to
the application or the user layer.
A user mode driver looks
very similar for a while.
You have the USB knob to which the
USB controller object driver is attached.
You have a USB device,
and then the driver for that device
is actually a user mode driver that
lives above the kernel boundary.
For example, a scanner driver.
So where does USB live?
Those of you who've been to the
I/O Kit presentation or the FireWire
presentation recognize this slide.
The USB drivers,
the USB stack lives with I/O Kit in the
In the kernel, next to the Mach kernel,
and as William said,
there's a dotted line which sort of
indicates that it may be possible that
a USB driver would not actually have
to use the file system or networking
or the BSD kernel in order to talk to
the layers above the kernel boundary.
So now if you're like me,
and I know that I am,
there is a more concrete
example for how we match and
load a driver would be useful.
So we're going to start here
and I'm going to talk about
human interface devices,
specifically mice and keyboards,
because those are drivers that the source
for these two drivers is in Darwin.
So you can actually look at Darwin and
follow along with what I'm saying here.
So the bottom layer we have the
driver for the USB controller.
The name of this class
that this object is,
is Apple OHCI, and it's a subclass of the
I/O USB controller class.
Once this object comes, it loads a root,
it instantiates a root hub,
loads the root hub driver,
and that root hub driver then tells
the controller to go out onto the
bus and find all the USB devices.
So it goes out into the bus.
It goes out and it finds a I/O USB,
it finds two USB devices, in this case,
and instantiates what are called nubs.
These are I/O USB device nubs.
One of them will end up having
a name in the I/O registry of,
in this case, M4848, which is the old
original Apple USB mouse,
or M2452,
which is the original Apple USB keyboard.
So these are not drivers.
These are nubs that represent the device,
and they contain inside of their
objects information about the device.
The I/O Kit then tries to load
drivers for these devices,
and as they are both composite devices,
the driver that gets loaded
is the Apple composite driver.
Each one of them gets a
separate instantiation of
the Apple composite driver.
The Apple composite driver then
goes out and sets and chooses
a configuration in the device,
and in this case it always
chooses the first configuration.
And then it asks for the interfaces
that are part of that configuration.
These interfaces then appear.
These are nubs that the,
that are attached to the device.
They contain information about the class,
subclass,
protocol and so forth of the interface.
And then are published to I/O Kit.
I/O Kit then goes out and says, okay,
now I need drivers for these two devices.
Well, for the mouse,
the driver that gets loaded
is the Apple mouse driver.
For the keyboard,
the driver that gets loaded
is the Apple keyboard driver.
The Apple mouse driver is a subclass
of the I/O HI pointing class,
which in turn is a subclass
of the I/O HI device class.
The keyboard, similarly,
is a subclass of I/O HI keyboard,
which is a subclass of I/O HI device.
So at this point we now have
a driver that knows how to
get information from that,
through that interface from that device.
So what is it going to
do with that information?
Well within Mac OS X,
there is in this particular case,
an object that was instantiated
long before this occurred,
called the IOHID system.
And the IOHID system tells itself,
tells the system,
tells I/O Kit when it is instantiated,
that it wants to know about
any device that appears that
is a subclass of IOHI device.
So both of these are,
it is notified about both of them,
and it attaches itself to both of them.
The IOHID system has as part
of it the IOHID user client,
which is the part that allows it to
pass information on to the IOHID user.
So it has information
across the kernel boundary,
and its client across the kernel
boundary is the window manager.
So in this, so, so,
because the mouse complies
to an IOHI device,
or is a subclass of IOHI device,
and the keyboard is a
subclass of IOHI device,
they automatically get
attached to the IOHID system,
or in fact the IOHID system
gets attached to them,
and we get information passed up to the
system without any other effort on the,
on the part of the driver writer.
Thank you.
So I want to talk a little bit
about the various classes that
make up the USB family in Mac OS X.
The I/O USB controller class
is the heart of the USB family,
and it is through this class
that the data transfer occurs
to the actual hardware.
This is what we would
call the WIM in Mac OS 9.
The Apple OHCI driver is a particular
instantiation of this class that
accesses the USB host controller driver
inside of every Mac that we have today.
The I/O USB device class is a
class that gets instantiated
once per device on the USB bus.
And this class is responsible
for maintaining the node ID.
It is matched by I/O Kit based
on USB vendor ID,
product ID, and so forth.
And its main job is to publish
nubs of class I/O USB interface.
The IOU SB interface class.
There is one of these instantiated
per interface on a particular
configuration per device.
and this class instantiates
and distributes to the drivers
objects of type I/O/USB pipe.
The IOUSB pipe class is the object that
the drivers will use to actually read
and write data to and from the USB bus.
There's one pipe, there's one pipe,
There's one of these objects
per pipe on each interface.
And this object provides the
methods for data transfer.
So a driver will be attached to an
IOUSB interface nub and will ask that
interface nub to give it the pipes.
In our example that
I showed a minute ago,
if the device is an I/O HI device,
currently in DP4,
if that device is either
HI pointing or HI keyboard,
then the HID system will
automatically attach to it,
and there is an API that the HID system
uses to pass keyboard and mouse data
up to the user space of Mac OS X.
So I want to switch to demo one.
And what we have here
is a system running DP4,
and I wanted to show the, the, the,
the the HID stack that I was
talking about using a tool that's
in DP4 called IO Registry Explorer.
So with this tool, you'll see here that
we have the Apple OHCI,
that is the,
the object in IO Registry Explorer,
that is the driver for
the USB controller chip.
And it has,
and this is the IO Service Plane,
and it has four devices attached to it.
It has the root hub,
it has a hub inside the keyboard,
it has the keyboard,
which on my slide was M2452 or,
and it has the mouse.
So we will look at the mouse.
The Apple USB mouse, this is, this is,
the class of this
object is IO USB Device,
but its name is USB Apple Mouse.
This is a nub.
A driver was loaded against this nub.
In this case, the name of the driver
was Apple Composite.
The Apple composite driver told the
USB mouse to publish an interface.
There's the interface.
This interface was then published and
I/O Kit matched the driver against it.
The name of the driver that was
matched against it is Apple Mouse.
This Apple Mouse,
the class name is Apple Mouse.
The subclass is I/O HI Pointing,
and that in turn is a
subclass of I/O HI Device.
So because it's an I/O HI Device,
we have the HID system that
was automatically notified and
matched against the Apple Mouse.
And the HID user client is then
used to pass the mouse information
up to the window manager.
And I think that's it for the demo.
So we'll go back to the slides.
That's it for me,
so I guess Craig comes back up.
Thank you.
Thanks, Rhoaads.
So let's compare the differences
between Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
Really not that dramatic.
The APIs are essentially the same.
I'm not going to claim that
the names are identical,
but the basic functionality is you have
the ability to read and write on pipes.
You have the ability to locate
those pipes in the interface.
You can use, if you need to,
callback routines.
So in many ways,
the mechanisms that you use in 9 would
be the same mechanisms for communicating
with a device that you will use in 10.
The driver description
mechanism of vendor ID,
product ID, class, subclass protocol,
we follow the rules in
the USB specification for
matching those devices.
So what's in DP4?
Well, as Rhoaads pointed out,
we have the keyboard and mouse.
We also have USB printing
to PostScript printers.
So we certainly are
going to do more later.
One thing I do want to mention
though is that we're fine tuning
the USB driver and object names and
expect them to change after DP4.
We haven't finalized those names yet.
So what's going to be in the public beta?
Well, what's in DP4 plus some
basic USB mass storage.
That's expected,
that's what we're planning
on doing for public beta,
is to add basic USB mass storage,
and that basically means
things like Zuper disks,
ZIP drives, etc.
Very basic USB mass storage.
So beyond Mac OS X public beta,
we're going to add much of the same
functionality we have in 9 to 10.
So HID devices,
hopefully you've seen some of
the HID Manager presentation
that talked about what we're
going to be doing in Mac OS X.
We will have the support in the
HID Manager for USB HID devices.
So right now, as an example,
you can use the HID parser in Mac OS,
the HID support library,
in Mac OS 9 to do this.
The same functionality
would be achievable with
the HID Manager in Mac OS X,
where you can control USB-enabled UPSs,
USB-enabled displays.
If you have a HID interface
in a USB display,
you would be able to write a display
control panel that would use that
HID interface to control the display.
Gaming devices,
all the HID USB devices I've
seen comply with the standard
with very rare exception,
and you'll be able to use that
HID interface to control the display.
use the HID manager in
Mac OS X to use that.
Tablets and graphical other
pointing devices will also be
accessible through the HID Manager.
We're still going to have
USB printing to PostScript printers.
We're going to have more
USB mass storage devices.
I'm not really able to predict
exactly which ones will be just yet,
but we're certainly
going to add a lot more.
And we'll also support USB audio.
Oh, and one last thing, that modem,
that V.90, V.25, TUR,
Hayes compatible modem will
also be supported sometime
after Mac OS X public beta.
So what do I want you to
take away from here today?
As far as Mac OS X goes,
we believe that C++, embedded C++,
and I/O Kit is a great
way of writing drivers.
All of our drivers use I/O Kit.
We find it very powerful.
If you listen to Dean Rees talk
in the I/O Kit presentation,
they came up with the architecture,
and as they started writing drivers,
they became more and more pleased
with the object inheritance and
the ability to do blocking I/O.
We also updated, as you might expect,
as you've seen on these slides,
we now have a Mach kernel.
We have a BSD kernel that allows
for really great driver writing.
We're blocking I/O and multi-threading,
etc.
And I can't tell you that you'll be
able to just take your USB drivers
from 9 and directly take the
sources over into 10 and go forward,
but based on your understanding
of how your Mac OS 9 driver works,
the same basic fundamental mechanisms of
communicating across pipes and pushing
data up to higher level objects will
be very similar in 10 as it is in 9.
So how do you get started with Mac OS X?
Well, DP4.
Go install it, go play with it,
go look at it, go investigate it.
Look at the KDK.
Go take a look at the KDK.
It has some example
drivers in there today.
Certainly we're working on
improving the documentation.
But in the meantime,
please do the I/O Kit tutorials
that come with the KDK and read
through the USB header files.
That'll give you a very definite
direction of where we're
going and what we're doing.
So what do we recommend?
Well,
I don't know how to put it on the slide,
but I will certainly re-emphasize,
it's very key, please, for Mac OS 9,
get the USB DDK.
Try it.
Go to the ADC seed site.
Get the OS updates that we do.
Try those.
Give us feedback.
We really want to know what you think.
We really want to get feedback.
File bugs using ADC's
online bug reporting system.
Let us know before we go GM,
because we can't fix a
GM release after we released it.
Please try the DDK.
Try the ADC seed site software releases.
That's very key.
So what you need to do to be
successful with USB is you
absolutely need to be in compliance
with the USB class specifications.
Go to www.usb.org.
Get the class specifications.
Read them, follow them,
implement your devices to them.
Follow the standard classes.
Follow the USB specification and device
enumeration and power consumption and
all of the communication protocols.
That's absolutely crucial.
We follow those specs as best we can.
You should too.
At least if you do,
you'll tremendously improve your
development time because you'll be
able to use the standard Apple drivers.
If you look at those specifications
and you find that they don't
meet your needs exactly then
there's a good thing you can do.
Join the USBIF implementers forum.
Go to the device working groups.
Tell them what you want.
Participate in the voting process.
Don't just look at a class specification
and decide this is not for me,
it doesn't do what I want.
If you feel passionately about
getting some feature put into the
class specification join the EIF,
get your vendor ID,
go to the device working groups,
participate in that discussion
and get your features added.
I heard earlier today that for
example that the video imaging live
video features of USB that that
spec is still being talked about.
If you want to do a USB video
device please go join the USBIF,
go to the device working groups,
give your feedback on what you
think video devices should be.
It's important.
As far as business planning stuff goes,
tell this to your marketing people.
License the Mac OS.
Put it on your box.
Make it clear and distinct that
this works for the Macintosh.
Follow the guidelines for the logo usage.
Put it on your marketing collateral.
Put it on your advertising.
Mention it in your press releases.
Do that.
That's the way that we communicate
to our customers that this
product works for the Mac.
If your marketing people come to you
and say here's the box design and
it doesn't have the Mac OS logo and
prominently displayed on the front,
tell them emphatically go
get the Mac OS logo license
and we can help with that.
The logo license.
The license is free.
There's recommendations on how
to use it in terms of sizing
and placement but absolutely go
get the Mac OS logo and use it.
Put your products in the
Macintosh products guide.
As ADC members that's free.
Well, it wouldn't be expensive.
It wouldn't except you have
to become an ADC member.
Go become an ADC member.
Get your products listed
in the products guide.
We take that products guide online
database and we periodically
press CDs and give those
CDs out at MacWare to the world.
If you want your customers,
your potential customers to
know about your products,
get them in the products guide.
You'll note that on our homepage now,
www.apple.com, in the very center there's
a made for Mac click spot,
a button.
That takes your customers to
the Macintosh products guide.
If you want your products
seen by customers,
get it in the Macintosh products guide.
Support the USB software locator.
We've listened really hard.
We've worked really hard to
understand what the issues are.
We've talked to developers whose devices
aren't in the software locator and asked
them to tell us what the issues were.
We took that feedback and
we aggressively got Aladdin,
and I'm very pleased to say
again that MindVision has stepped
up and they're going to do the
same thing for their installer.
You don't have to use Apple's installer.
That's the feedback we heard.
You didn't like using the Apple installer
to use USB software locator.
We've addressed that,
and you should now have no
reason for your vendor-specific
devices to not have your software
on the USB software locator.
So how do you make a
device class compliant?
I should have put this
slide a little earlier,
but I'll do it now.
Join the implementers forum.
They assign USB vendor IDs.
We have a number of products out there,
not ours,
we see a number of products out there,
where
the actual product or company name
on the device is different than the
vendor ID that's in the device itself.
So you'll see four companies,
entirely different devices,
using the same vendor ID.
Well, I tell you,
with the USB software locator,
we have a little bit of a problem.
We try to match up your
developer connection ID,
connect ID, with the vendor ID.
We don't want one developer
going in and messing around
with another person's software.
So please go join the USBi app,
get your own unique vendor ID,
and use it.
Don't create a device where you
buy a chip from somebody else
and just use their vendor ID.
Get your own vendor ID.
The other thing that they do that you
should participate in is they have
these periodic compliance workshops.
I think three quarters out of
the year they're in Milpitas.
The fourth quarter out of
the year they're in Taiwan.
And these compliant workshops are
these great events where everybody
walks around with their devices,
plugs them into the OS,
whatever that OS is,
ours somebody-- some of our competitors,
et cetera,
and verifies that they function.
And it's great feedback for us.
We try to go when we've got no conflicts
with our engineering schedules to meet
with the developers and see what we
can do to help make our software better
and help make their devices better.
Participate in the
USB device working groups.
If you feel passionately,
join that process.
Make your voice heard.
And as I've said a couple of times,
www.usb.org.